>> Kyle: Within those primitive types
there are special values that we should
pay attention to.
And there are a number of them but
I wanna focus our attention on
two specific special values.
These are ones that crop up much more
often than we would like, or at least some
of them, at least one of them crops
up more often than we would like.
And awareness of both of them
is gonna help us avoid bugs and
in some cases, even get more power
out of our JavaScript language.
So let's look at the first
one it's referred to as NaN,
which is supposedly an acronym for
not a number.
Historically, that's where it comes from,
NaN comes to us at least in JavaScript,
it comes by way of the IEEE 754 spec,
the number spec.
Essentially NaN doesn't mean not
a number essentially it means
this special what we call sentinel
value that indicates an invalid number.
That's a much better mental model for
it than referring to it is not a number,
we oughta refer to at as an invalid
number, so let's dig into that.
How do we arrive at something like a Nan?
Well, number one, you can take things
that are representations of numbers in
string form, in this case.
Like for example, my age at the moment
is 38, and I can represent that either
as quote 38 or, in this case, on line 1,
I could represent it in octal.
The octal representation being 46.
I don't like that one,
cuz that makes me sound a lot older so
I don't wanna use that.
But I can represent it in string form, and
then I have a number, like the number 38.
Or I can do quote 39 to
reference my next age.
I don't own cats anymore, so
when I say my cat's age, and
I use something like not applicable
there's no number to use to refer to that.
And let me be very specific and
clear with you the number 0 is
not the way you indicate
the absence of valid numeric value.
Talk to any math mathematician, the number
0 is absolutely an important number.
It is a number that has substance to it.
It's not appropriate in any way shape or
form to think of 0 as being the place
holder for absence of numeric value.
Doesn't make sense mathematically and
doesn't make sense programatically.
So what number should we use?
Well, that's why IEEE did when they
defined the special bit pattern that
represents this is
the number that we indicate.
It's not a valid number,
I can't do anything with n/a.
There's essentially no
number system where n/a
is a valid representation of a number
[LAUGH] unless you invented one.
So we get NaN back,
we get the invalid number back.
And by the way,
when you do things with an invalid number,
even things that seem crazy,
like subtracting strings,
you're gonna get invalid number back.
Line 4, my age minus, and
then a string, like my son's age,
doesn't actually make any sense,
not programatically, anyway.
But JavaScript has a way of thinking
about this that we often gloss over.
In particular, JavaScript thinks about
this as the minus operator needs numbers,
it's only defined for numbers.
When you give it something
that is not a number,
>> Kyle: Then it says,
I need to turn it into a number.
That's what we'll talk about when we
get into coercion in a little bit.
So, it turns the, quote, my son's age,
which by the way he's 8, my son's age,
it turns his age,
that string into the NaN value.
So when I say my age minus,
I'm actually saying my age minus NaN, and
NaN with any other mathematical operation
is always NaN, cuz it's invalid.
So NaN sort of propagates all the way out.
There's nothing that you can
ever do that includes a NaN and
results in anything other than a NaN,
mathematically anyway.
And by the way, you'll notice that
even though my cat's age is NaN,
it is not equal to itself, or at least
according to the triple equals operator,
it's not equal to itself.
Many people like to believe that
the triple equals operator tells you
the truth, but I have news for
you the triple equals operator lies.
It tells you that those
two things are not equal.
And the reason it does that is not
because Brendan Eich was crazy that day.
It does that because IEEE said
NaNs are not equal to each other.
As a matter of fact, NaN is the only value
in existence, at least in JavaScript,
it's the only value that does not have
what we call the identity property,
meaning it is not equal to itself.
It's the only value where that is true.
>> Speaker 2: Undefined,
undefined's the same?
>> Kyle: Undefined is
absolutely equal to itself.
NaN is the only value that
is not equal to itself.
So we need some way to determine
because triple equals lies to us,
we need some way to determine
if the value is in fact NaN.
And JavaScript shipped originally
with a utility called isNaN,
which when we pass a thing like
a number to it we correctly get false.
And when we pass a thing that actually,
legitimately is NaN, we get true.
Seems great until we look at line
10 when we pass in something that
is definitely not a number,
the string my son's age.
But let me ask you the question,
it's not a number, we agree with that, but
is it the NaN value?
Most definitely not.
So why do we still get true?
The historical reason for getting true,
is because for some reason, the isNaN
utility coerces values to numbers
before it checks for them to be NaN.
>> Kyle: So, it's gonna coerce
the string my son's age to a number and
guess what number it's gonna coerce it to?
The NaN value, so
of course it's gonna back true.
Now, guess how I know that it does that.
I read the spec, and the spec very
clearly says, coerce it to a number.
Sometime after that mistake
happened in initial JavaScript,
they decided that's a bad idea.
So with ES6, we got a better utility,
the Number.isNan utility.
And that Number.isNan tells us defiantly
for sure it's the NaN value or it's not.
In other words it doesn't
do any coercion for us.
It tells us specifically it's the number.
So like going back to your
question about what is NaN?
Well, if I do a numeric operation and
I get back a value what
type am I expecting back
from every single numeric operation?
I'm expecting a number, right?
And remember I said NaNs are part
of the IEEE 754 spec which is
a numeric representation specification.
So perplexingly,
the type of a NaN is number.
It's just an invalid number.
Which is why it's not appropriate to think
of it as not a number because then you
get into that weirdness the wording
of type of not a number is number?
That's because it's wrong to
think of it as not a number,
it's better to think of
it as an invalid number.
And of course the type of and
invalid number is definitely number.
I have people suggest to me no no no they
should have never done NaN nevermind what
I EEE 754 said.
They never should have done NaN,
we should have returned something else.
Really?
What should we return from
a numeric operation that's
gonna be not of the type number?
We could return back undefined,
but that's not numeric.
That's a terrible idea, to give developers
something that's a bait and switch.
We could maybe return back null,
terrible idea.
We could return back false, terrible idea,
we could return back, ugh, -1.
This is old, historical,
when you do something like index of, and
it can't find something in your string or
array.
Because in the old C days, you could only
return numbers, and they weren't IEEE 754.
So what was the only
number they could come up
with to represent didn't find it or
invalid search?
They chose -1, which was fine for
them like 40 years ago.
I don't know why we adopt it
in a JavaScript but we did.
So we have some of our APIs that return
back -1, when the more appropriate
number that we had in the language,
to represent I didn't find it as NaN.
If you're designing a system,
and you wanna return and
somebody expects to get a number and
you wanna signal to them there's no valid
number for me to give there is only
one value that makes any sense at all.
You should return the NaN.
But more than any other complaint
that I have on this list is when
people try to refer to 0 as
somehow a placeholder for NaN.
And we'll come back to this and
coercion and just a moment.
So NaN, it is a number, and
it is the invalid number, and
it is going to occur in your programs,
not maybe, it will, and
you should be testing for
it appropriately.
Otherwise, you have bugs and
you're not handling those bugs.